

This is written sorta with the anticipated audience of “someone who has never been to sub-saharan Africa, but is safari-curious” – many/most of my friends have been to Europe at least once, but the group that have been on safari is far smaller.

### Where to go for African Safari (Southern Africa vs East Africa)

If you spend any time Googling for “best places to safari in Africa”, two of the main destinations that come up repeatedly are 

1. East Africa: Tanzania/Kenya (the Ngorongoro Crater, the Serengeti, and/or Masai Mara in Kenya), featuring the Great Migration, over a million wildebeest and zebra travelling a [grand circuit](https://www.expertafrica.com/tanzania/info/serengeti-wildebeest-migration) across those two countries.  We visited that part of Africa (with our children) in 2013 and it was incredible; we loved it and a photo album of it can be found at [https://goo.gl/photos/r6Dv8fY5Q4zJtHJXA](https://goo.gl/photos/r6Dv8fY5Q4zJtHJXA).  Sadly, our trip planner said that during the time of year we visited in 2013 – August peak “river crossing season” – has now become terribly overcrowded, so we were lucky to go when we went.  See this [article](https://www.wildwonderfulworld.com/post/understanding-overtourism-and-the-great-migration) featuring a sad set of photos showing almost 100 vehicles at a single river crossing; we remember maybe 3-5 at a time just over a decade ago.  Not sure what the answer is but the Serengeti in summer is not a “remote” experience any longer.  Kili at Next Adventure says she now tries to steer visitors to the Serengeti to other times of year (spring is when the baby wildebeests are out, but no river crossings just due to the geography of where the animals are in April).  
2. Southern Africa: here there are two common choices.    
   1. One is to stay in the country of South Africa, featuring Kruger National Park and quite a few private reserves that have a remarkable collection of wildlife.  This is very accessible – I believe you can rent a car and drive around Kruger yourself with camps/lodges at various price points, but with that accessibility comes a bit (a lot?) more crowds.  We did none of this, we focused on culture and people (and wine) in South Africa.  
   2. The [Okavango Delta](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/slideshow/paid-content-10-reasons-to-visit-the-okavango-delta) in Botswana.  The Delta is one of the largest inland waterways on earth, and one of the least-populated places to see wildlife with also having upscale, tourist infrastructure (meaning: really nice camps).  This means, compared to many spots in South Africa, in the Okavango you have the possibility to see 0 or 1 other vehicle in 4 hours because it’s so remote and by design lightly visited – but also then return to a very very nice camp with flush toilets, warm showers, comfortable beds, and excellent food – while staring at a hippo pool.  On the other hand …. Doing what we did is not a ‘budget’ option; I read somewhere (but can’t find it now) that Botswana long ago made a decision to have the Okavango less-developed for a more upscale experience – more expensive, but also less crowded.   

The 3rd Africa safari highlight on many lists is Gorillas in Rwanda/Uganda – which is what we hope is our next safari. 

### How We Organized It

Broadly speaking, it’s very challenging (impossible?) to plan a Botswana safari “on your own” – there are (small) charter planes to get from place to place, lots of logistics, no self-driving.  I can imagine (at least) 3 different categories of companies to organize your trip – if you search for “safari operators” there are quite a few companies wanting to help spend your money:

* Using a travel operator that operates around the world; we used to use [Big Five](https://bigfive.com/) for planning for exactly that reason.  We/I got disenchanted with them, because while they did a perfectly good job organizing our 2011 Costa Rica and 2013 Tanzania trip, when we wanted to plan our next trip they assigned us the same “trip planner” – meaning she was/is supposed to be an expert on every country on earth, which is unrealistic.  We have since sought companies that specialize in a region, so the person you’re talking to has, you know, actually been to where you’re discussing and not reading off a web page.  
* Africa-based tour operators – we really were interested in this, because we wanted as much of our $ as possible to stay in Africa.  We came close to choosing [Roar Africa](https://www.roarafrica.com/luxury-african-safari-campaign) who we found online, one of their main selling points is that most of the people you deal with in Africa are Roar employees so there’s one company to deal with. We still were able to talk to a seemingly-knowledgeable salesperson who lives in the US – but while she had been to Africa unlike our Big 5 salesperson, she had been … exactly once.    
* US-based travel planners who specialize in Africa and partner with African operators – this was in the end what we chose.  A friend recommended [Next Adventure](https://www.nextadventure.com/), a Berkeley (CA) husband-and-wife (and maybe 3 other employee) travel planner that does ‘only’ Africa.  Next Adventure’s main proprietor Kili got her name when her parents found out they were pregnant on Mt Kilimanjaro, and her father ran an adventure travel company himself.  Kili has been to Africa literally dozens of times, but also understands her clients well, and for us could say “Think of Cape Town as more like San Francisco, and Johannesburg as more like Los Angeles” which resonates.  Our Roar salesperson had been to Africa once; Kili had been to every single place she was recommending, and many others besides – that gave us a lot of comfort.

We can’t guarantee they’re the best or anything, nor whether the price we paid was high or low, but we are happy with our choice.  Kili and the team did an excellent job listening to what we wanted.  We started with “we want Okavango Delta and Victoria Falls”, we went back and forth on how many days, and our roughly desired budget, and she gave us 2-4 options to at least start the process, and then was able to customize as we asked.  Although I said above that the Okavango is not inexpensive – there are multiple different price points for safari camps there, ours was far from the most expensive, but even the two Botswana camps we ended up staying at were quite different (e.g., one was nearly twice as expensive as the other), and there are ones that are far more affordable than what we experienced, as well as ones which are next level higher (I can’t imagine why).  Kili was good at navigating different budgets with us.

Note that Next Adventure partners with multiple companies on the ground in Africa for the actual guiding and logistics.  In our case the company that operated our two Botswana camps was [Natural Selection](https://naturalselection.travel/), who are on the ground in the right timezone, and if we had had any problems (we did not) we were supposed to contact Natural Selection first.  We have of course wondered if we had just gone directly to Natural Selection whether the price point would have been different – but on the other hand, we didn’t know to find them/pick them, and/or calling them 9 time zones away would have been less convenient.  Natural Selection actually operated our two Okavango camps; we’re honestly not 100% clear what company actually operated some of the other logistics in Zimbabwe or South Africa.  But the good news is we didn’t have to care – every single transfer, trip, flight went impeccably.

Note we likely could have organized the South Africa (non-Botswana) part on our own (e.g. without Next Adventure), and maybe saved some money … but it was easier just to have one organizer.

In advance, Next Adventure gave us both a 25-page binder and an easy-to-navigate website and mobile app.  It was pretty easy to figure out where we were supposed to be and when.  

### Trip Overview

Our key goal was to see the Okavango Delta (one of the best places anywhere to see African wildlife), and if you’re near there then see Victoria Falls, by some measures the largest waterfall on earth.  We organized our trip around those two pillars.  Here’s our basic outline:

* 4 nights in Cape Town.  Partially it’s 9 time zones from California and we wanted to get over jet lag in a city.   In 2013, we were in ‘the bush’ 24 hours after our Africa arrival, and it’s exceedingly hard to get over jet lag with lions roaring right outside your canvas tent.  But partially Cape Town is a beautiful city and of course the (recent) history is interesting to learn about.    
  * Note that two of our friends who later met us in Zimbabwe went to Johannesburg instead of Cape Town, which has more apartheid history (including the Apartheid Museum and both Mandela’s and Tutu’s home in Soweto), but generally has the reputation of being less attractive nature-wise.  Joburg has a *reputation* of being less safe, though that appears to be very location-specific, e.g. there are safer and less safe regions of each city, so we don’t know for sure how based in reality that reputation is.  
* 2 nights in Victoria Falls. We arrived mid-afternoon one day just due to flight logistics from South Africa, so we ended up with roughly 1.5 days there, which worked out perfectly.  
* 7 nights in the Okavango – we did 3 nights at one camp and 4 at another.  Honestly, by day 9 of safari (because we did 2 days near Victoria Falls), it’s hard to get as excited as you were a week ago at Yet Another Zebra – but our very last game drive, at 5:30pm of day 9, was when we saw our one male lion, so it’s just so hard to know what the right timeline is.  More time gives you more opportunity; my brother was in Tanzania a year earlier and saw his one cheetah pursuit on day 11\.  I think we’re pretty happy with 9 total days ‘in the bush’, but your mileage may vary ;).    
* 4 nights in the Cape Winelands, the wine region an hour north and east of Cape Town.  We wanted, after 9 days on safari and before getting on a 15-hour flight to Atlanta, to have some downtime (our friends went home straight from the safari due to job considerations).  This was somewhat anticlimactic after all the safari animals, but quite pleasant.  2-3 nights would be totally reasonable.

### Air Transfers

Note that we booked both our intercontinental flights (Delta SFO=\>Atlanta=\>Cape Town and back), but also our internal-to-Africa but across-national-border flights (Cape Town \=\> Victoria Falls; Maun \=\> Cape Town).  We flew Airlink, which is a South Africa-based commercial carrier, from South Africa to Botswana and then back 9 days later.  Airlink was 100% fine – not luxurious, but probably not that different from a US-based carrier like American Eagle.

Next Adventure booked the charter flights within Botswana.  We never interacted directly with MackAir, who did all the transfers within Botswana – they were booked for us, and as far as we can tell are the only option, it was the only operator we saw on the Botswana airstrips.  By and large Mackair does a nice job.  As far as we can tell there is no schedule you can book – rather they have hundreds of people booked for a given day, and they schedule the charter flights based on demand only the day before, and they tell your safari camp the schedule, so that you get told at dinner the night before “your flight is tomorrow morning at 10:20am” and that’s it, you have no choice.  By and large this worked great, our only bummer was on our final flight from North Island back down to Maun – it coulda been a nice 25 minute direct flight but instead we took the local, 3 flights totalling 75 minutes, which in a small 14-seater was very much not great.  But … there are no real viable alternatives.

We were mostly on 14-seat prop planes.  Not fabulous, a bit cozy, but more than fine. 

### Time of Year

Recall that all these locations are in the Southern Hemisphere.  We went roughly the end of July through mid-August, and it worked great.  We had to balance 3 factors: best times for Okavango, best times for Victoria Falls, and best time for Cape Town.  Those are not the same month (we visited Cape Town in off-season), but still the right overall choice we think:  

* For Okavango, many websites (see [here](https://okavangodelta.com/best-time-to-visit-the-okavango-delta/)) recommend June through October, because ironically it’s the dry season but also the wet season.    
  * A unique characteristic of the Okavango is that the rainy season is US spring, their fall and the dry season is their winter – so when we were there in August the sky was glorious clear-blue.    
  * But the water on the ground in the Okavango actually comes from rain that falls in the mountains of Angola months earlier (it’s a very gradual slope so the water travels slowly), so that it’s quite wet on the Okavango ground (in fact many sites call August “the flood season”), leaving lots of beautiful watering holes filled with animals.  This meant our vehicles did a \*lot\* of water crossing, and at times we were going through 12-24 inches of water for minutes at a time.  
  * Many other websites will also say that you want to go in the dry season because the vegetation is less lush, so you can actually find the animals, who can hide better  in the underbrush when there’s more vegetation.  
  * This meant we were there in Botswana winter.  This means (see below) that on safari mornings we often woke up in 40 degree temperatures, and the 7-9am part of each morning was quite chilly, though we were shedding layers from 9 to 11am.  But in the afternoon it was a lovely 80 degrees or so, and still comfortable at sunset – we were told if we had waited even 6 weeks later those afternoons are more like 90s.  So we were fine with a bit of morning cold.  
* For Victoria Falls, it’s about water flow; see [this article](https://www.go2africa.com/destinations/victoria-falls/when-to-go).  The peak ‘flow’ is late in the rainy season, roughly March and April.  But from the Zimbabwe side (which we visited; the falls are between Zimbabwe and Zambia), the thunder of the falls is so much that from the ground the mist may obscure the falls at the absolute peak.  We were absolutely fine with a visit in August – we got plenty soaked seeing the falls, and the mist obscured parts of it, but if you look at the article linked above you can see that the mist is soooo strong at peak water flow … I’m not sure that’s better.   
* This means we were visiting Cape Town in their winter – think San Francisco in January, not Chicago, but it’s the rainy season there.  We got lucky and had minimal rain, but you can get a very different experience, so we didn’t get Cape Town at its best.   But that was the compromise we were willing to make. 

### Packing

There are dozens of guides out there on safari clothing.  The things that I will add is that at the price point of our two Okavango camps, there is free laundry, and it comes back same-day, so you leave some stuff out before you depart at 630am, and late that afternoon it’s back.  So … at that point you really don’t need to bring a lot at all.

Many guides will tell you that in winter it’s cold in Botswana, and take that seriously.  Our camp operators had large blanket-style ponchos available for the morning drives (with highly-appreciated hot-water bottles), but we used those *over* two shirts and a puffy jacket – it’s a raw 40 degrees or so first thing in the morning, and the trucks don’t even have sides much less windows.  You’ll shed clothes all morning, but you want warm clothes for the first two hours for sure.

One other note: one nice thing about the Okavango is it’s not nearly as dusty as the Serengeti – honestly we’d come back after a day ‘out on drive’ … and not feel all that dirty.  We remember feeling differently in Tanzania.

All guides will say that you are required to use soft-sided luggage (e.g. duffel) and that the weight limit is very serious of 20 kg (44 lbs).  The gate agent *did* weigh us on our first MackAir flight (from Kasane to Sable Alley), and they were serious about it – we had to switch a laptop from one of our bags to another to make the limit.  I don’t think we got to “what are the consequences” if we had been far over.

### Tipping

Your trip planner will likely have a set of ‘suggested tips’.  At each lodge, you give all tips at the end of your stay.   There is a box where at the end of your camp stay you can put the “tip for all the staff that isn’t your guide”, and typically you can give the tip to your guide directly.  South Africans prefer Rand (their currency); in Botswana we were encouraged to use USD, so we never took out a penny of the Botswana currency.

We found it helpful to bring a bunch of envelopes prepared ahead of time – e.g., “Camp \#1 staff’ and “Camp \#1 guide’ with the $ counted out, made things less stressful while we were out on vacation.

### The Safari Experience

A typical safari day can be a strange experience, in that you often sit on your posterior most of the day, yet it’s (in a good way) intense.  There are walking safaris in various places, and/or we did 3 boat trips on this journey, but by and large, a typical day is two game drives, one morning and one late afternoon – because that’s when you can see the animals, and in mid-day most of the animals are hiding or resting relatively speaking.  So for us a typical day was:

* Wake up at 5:30 (first camp) or 6:00am (second camp).  Have either coffee or light breakfast, get in your vehicle by 6:45am for morning drive, just before dawn.  
* 6:45-11:15ish morning drive, punctuated by a delightful coffee break around 9ish.  Of course, all this is dependent on what you’re seeing – if there’s a great leopard viewing at 8:45, they don’t cut it short for 9am coffee – but there was a predictable 15 minutes each morning for the driver to find a spot where he could see around us (for safety), get out some coffee and usually a few snacks (biscuits, jerky, hard-boiled eggs, etc), and we could stretch our legs.  Similarly the drive would end “as appropriate”; one day we were almost back to camp and then had the best elephant sighting of the whole trip, and the guide just parked and let us immerse ourselves in it, and we got back ‘late’ to camp \- who cares.  
* 1130-3 or so – downtime.  Time to go back to your room, shower (it’s both too cold and too early to shower before the morning drive), rest, enjoy a lunch in the 1230-2 range.  We had a number of camps with plunge pools and the like, but these are not for August, the water was frigid.  One of our camps had massages which was delightful, and all of our camps had nice chairs/couches to just relax, as well as nice decks on each tent.  There were pools in front of each Okavango camp, with hippos, elephants, and kudu (a large antelope) coming through in full view of the lunch spot.  
* 3:30 – ‘tea’ – this part of “Botswana used to be a British protectorate” seems on full display.  
* 4-645 or so (Sunset) – afternoon game drive.  Also I think a leftover of British time, the ‘sundowner’ (cocktail in the bush) is very much a part of each afternoon drive.  We did these every day in the vehicle – our guide would find a great spot, usually  with a herd of zebra or giraffe or similar in close view, and pour drinks in the front seat to pass back right around 5:30 or 6:00 each day.  Not too stressful.  
* 6:45 maybe 45 minutes by the fire pit, usually meeting other groups and doing the “what did you see” game.  Mostly great, give or take the “do you want to see the Zebra I shot?” from a drunk Florida couple one night.  
* 730-9 dinner  
* And by 9 … you’re usually pretty tired, the camp gets quiet pretty early.

There’s little physical activity – but at least for us, when we were in the vehicles, we are *on alert* – partially because there’s not much else to do (no cell service\!) – but partially because at any moment there might be a leopard, or a jackal, or a rare antelope around the corner.  Mixed with some amount of reptilian-brain action that these are predators and that elephants are large – there’s a certain heightened awareness throughout the time in the truck.

By and large the ‘alert’ isn’t so much a feeling of not being safe – on our second safari, we never felt anxious.  There’s a strange sense of calm; even though Botswana features open-sided trucks so there’s really not much protecting you.  We figure that if a few tourists were mauled each year, we’d know it – and it’s just not at all something that seems to happen often.  The guides all say that the animals see trucks as a silhouette (and they’re pretty vigilant about not having arms and legs hanging out), and for reasons we don’t quite understand … the animals don’t see potential prey.  All that being said … 3 weeks after our return, we saw this [lovely news article](https://abcnews.go.com/GMA/Living/tourists-speak-after-elephant-charges-safari/story?id=126284923) about an elephant charging and nearly killing a few kayakers in the Okavango – evidently the tourguide didn’t see that a mother elephant had two nearby calves, thus enraging the mother.  But that seems to be quite unusual (hence it was a worldwide news story), and we never worried, even as a leopard or lion walked right up to the truck.

Note that at all 3 camps, and I believe this is 100% the norm: you will have the same guide for the entire time at that camp.  Put otherwise, someone will meet you at the airstrip, and he (seems to always be a ‘he’) will be your taxi driver back and forth to camp, your safari guide, and your boat captain, for several days.  I suspect that on rare occasions there is a reassignment due to mismatch in style, but we liked all three of our guides.    One thing we learned on our first safari stop is that many (all?) of the staff have “tourist-friendly” nicknames – our first tour guide introduced himself as “Pressure”.  It felt rude to ask him (or any of the other staff members we met at any of our lodge destinations, who also typically had English-friendly names) what his mother calls him.

If you have a chance, read [Cry of the Kalahari](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00JTJDB2W/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_d_asin_title_351_o07?ie=UTF8&psc=1) before you go – it’s about a young American couple of wildlife biologists first studying in Botswana in the 1970s.  It was very evocative of just how much that country has changed in such a short period of time.