

I want to be very careful what I put onto the public web because I'm obviously no expert on South Africa after a whole week there, when it has 400 years of complex history since first European settlement (and of course Africa tribes there tens of thousands of years before that).  But I’ve had quite a few people ask about our observations there, so here goes.  Before visiting, I read a number of books and web pages to learn ‘more’, but … there’s a lot to learn. I recommend [Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00J2PCUCU/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_d_asin_title_318_o05?ie=UTF8&psc=1) (movie), and it’s pretty dense but I got a lot out of reading [South Africa – The Rise and Fall of Apartheid](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B09S4TPTN2/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_d_asin_title_351_o06?ie=UTF8&psc=1).  I also read Michener’s [The Covenant](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00H6JHMMM/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_d_asin_title_351_o03?ie=UTF8&psc=1) – I have mixed emotions, it’s 1200 pages, some of it is very dated-feeling. Michener definitely tries to be 1970s-style respectful of various cultures, but also very clearly has a hierarchy of cultures in his mind.  But … it did give me a feel of the whole sweep of South African history, and the differences between the Dutch and English settlers there (and how crazy the Boer war was).  I also love love love Trevor Noah’s [Born a Crime](https://www.amazon.com/Born-Crime-Stories-African-Childhood/dp/0399588191), which I highly recommend in audio-book format, because part of his story as a mixed-race South African is his effortless ability to switch languages, and *listening* to him move from Xhose (a “click” language) to Zulu to English to Afrikaans (which is not-quite-Dutch) – is fascinating. 

By and large, from talking to various people as well as my reading, it feels remarkable that South Africa is not even in a worse place.  As one guide said to us, as much as there was violence in the ‘80s and ‘90s … the country has moved from decades of a horrible apartheid regime to something like a black-majority democracy *without* a full-on civil war.  And that wasn’t guaranteed, at all.  

All that being said … it’s a strange dynamic.  Many analyses demonstrate that the gap between rich & poor in South Africa is the [largest in the world](https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/wealth-inequality-by-country) and it’s so evident (yes, the US is worse than it should be, but not nearly as high on the list).  On the way from the airport into Cape Town’s C.B.D. (Central Business District), you pass just endless miles of townships, right next to the highway.  And then there are sections of Cape Town’s suburbs that … look like the wealthiest suburbs of the US (with high walls/gates).  I”m sure some readers will see this and say the US has a horrible gap and too much poverty too, and I’m not unaware of that … but the townships outside Cape Town do look like a next level of poverty.  You can see semi-legal jerry-rigged power poles over many of the townships, and one of Mandela’s priorities was to get running water into more of the townships – but they look very sad. I’m disappointed in myself that I didn’t visit a township, there are various ways to do so; see this interesting [Cape Town township travelogue](https://www.stokedtotravel.com/visit-south-africa-langa-township-cape-town/) (by someone else).  

Another observation is the degree to which Mandela is just venerated there (and appropriately so). He’s everywhere – he’s on every bill of the currency, there are statues of him, there are souvenirs of him, there are beautiful art works of him.  Several locals of all races confirmed he’s still viewed positively by almost all.  Sadly, his successors … not so much.

I’ve mentioned this before, but there does seem a legacy of just casual, no big deal, racism while visiting.  We went to one Cape Town CBD wine bar where the first 2 staff we met were knowledgeable, and extremely competent – and also happened to be black.  Then the white owner/manager came in and started chatting us up … then after a minor issue started berating his black staff right in front of us.  He then turned to us and right in front of his (black) staff gave us a knowing glance and said some form of “well, you know, you can’t hire good staff anymore”.  Blech.  And one driver made more than one terrible judgment of the blacks on the street looking for work … and somehow felt that was ok.  Minor issues … but really shocking at the same time.

We were fascinated to visit, and hope to return.



